In 711 AD, a Muslim force that likely
began with around a few thousand men and
was later reinforced, crossed a narrow
strip of water
>> [music]
>> into southern Spain. Within 7 years,
they controlled most of the Iberian
Peninsula. The overwhelmingly Christian
population, along with smaller Jewish
communities, didn't suddenly change its
religious makeup overnight. In fact,
[music] it likely took several
centuries, probably until around the
10th or 11th century in much of
Al-Andalus before Muslims became the
[music] majority. But, how did it
happen? In the years that followed the
Battle of Guadalete, Muslim forces
quickly conquered the vast majority of
the peninsula and by 718, most of the
major urban centers were under Muslim
control. The territory came to be known
as Al-Andalus and became a province of
the Umayyad Caliphate. The initial
Muslim population mostly consisted of a
relatively small Arab and Berber [music]
military elite. For generations, this
Muslim minority ruled over a population
of several million Hispano-Romans and
Visigothic Christians alongside Jewish
communities. However, by around 1100 AD,
the religious demographics of Al-Andalus
had drastically changed. By the 11th
century, Muslims were likely the
majority across much of Al-Andalus and
many major cities, like Cordoba and
Seville, were probably predominantly
Muslim, though the northern parts of the
peninsula remained mostly Christian.
[music]
So, how did a territory of millions of
Christians become overwhelmingly Muslim
without mass forced conversion? The
shift from a Christian to a Muslim
majority didn't happen mainly through
force. Under Islamic law, Christians and
Jews could, in principle, remain as
protected communities or people of the
book, though that status came with
taxes, legal inequalities, and was not
applied in exactly the same way in every
period. Instead, for the most part,
conversions to Islam were personal
decisions shaped by many factors. After
the peninsula fell under Muslim control,
many of the Hispano-Roman and Visigothic
aristocracy became some of the earliest
converts. In most cases, this wasn't
driven by a sudden spiritual revelation,
but by self-interest. Under the new
Umayyad regime, many Christian elites
risked losing their lands, wealth, and
influence if they resisted. So, to get
around this, many negotiated agreements
with the Muslim conquerors. These
agreements, known in Arabic as sulh,
allowed the upper class to keep control
of their estates and even some of their
governing roles, so long as they
accepted Muslim political authority. To
further their allegiance, many
aristocrats converted to Islam to
strengthen the relationship and make
their loyalty clear. Upon embracing
their new faith, they became known as
Muwalladun, a term commonly used for
local converts and especially their
descendants. Many of these former
Christians adopted Arabic names, and
some even fabricated Arab-style
genealogies to cement their place in the
new society. This helped them claim
higher status, attach themselves more
closely to the ruling culture, and gave
them access to social benefits. The
conversion of the Hispano-Roman and
Visigothic elite had a broad effect on
the classes beneath them. As the
powerful ruling families changed their
religion, others followed. Over time,
servants, tenants, and entire local
communities converted to Islam hoping it
could improve their own social standing.
After many generations, this created a
trend that slowly reshaped much of the
peninsula and contributed greatly to the
steady growth of a Muslim majority in
Iberia. But, elite conversion wasn't the
only factor. Economic realities played a
major role. Under Islamic rule in
Al-Andalus, Christians and Jews were
grouped together as Zimmi, or protected
[music] peoples. This granted them the
right to keep practicing their own
religion and maintain many communal
institutions, maintain their synagogues
and churches, and manage most of their
affairs in their local communities.
However, this protected status came with
a price. Zimmis had to pay a special
[music] tax known as Jizya, which
Muslims were exempt from. While rates
varied, the amount of Jizya depended on
region, time, and wealth, and not every
person paid it equally. Eligible adult
non-Muslim men were the usual taxpayers,
while many others could be exempt.
Alongside the Jizya, land could also be
subject to taxes, such as Kharaj. This
tax was tied to the land itself rather
than the owner. Though the exact system
varied across time and place. For
farmers, landowners, and craftsmen,
these obliga- -gations could be a real
burden, especially when compared with
the fiscal advantages of belonging to
the Muslim community. Most Muslims were
only required to give Zakat, a form of
religious charity and one of the five
pillars of Islam. Cultivators could also
owe other dues, such as Ushur. So,
conversion did not erase taxation
altogether. Over time, these policies
created a clear economic divide between
the religious communities. Many
non-Muslims simply converted to Islam to
avoid such heavy taxes. Conversion
brought possible financial relief and
improved long-term economic prospects.
However, even if a non-Muslim landowner
converted to Islam, they weren't always
exempt from land tax entirely. Instead,
in theory, converts might pay ushr, a
lighter tithe, but in practice, early
Islamic tax systems were not always
applied consistently and Umayyad
authorities sometimes continued to levy
kharaj on converts as well. When we look
at the tax system as a whole, it becomes
clear why so many landowners and members
[music] of the working class decided to
convert. The practical incentives
associated with Islam became too
significant to ignore and those who were
struggling financially could erase that
burden simply by changing their
religion. But the reasons for converting
went well beyond taxes. In the early
centuries of Islamic Iberia, even if a
non-Muslim converted to Islam, they
weren't always fully accepted into
society. Conversion did not instantly
erase older social barriers and Arab
lineage still carried a prestige. In
simple terms, many converts sought
closer ties with established Arab
families or tribes in order protection,
patronage, and standing. One important
mechanism for this was becoming a mawla
or client of an Arab lineage. For
example, someone of Hispano-Roman,
Visigothic, or even Berber descent might
form a connection with an elite family
of Arabic descent. Following this, they
became a mawla of the tribe and began to
associate themselves symbolically with
the tribe's ancestral lineage, perhaps
even adopting its name. In return, the
Arabic family often provided the convert
and their family with protection,
support, and even helped them gain
influence in the wider Islamic social
hierarchy. This created a formal bond
between converts and established Arab
lineages, tying them into a system built
on loyalty and shared identity. This
relationship also accelerated the
Arabization of the older Christian
communities. Close association with the
ruling elite meant converts had to adopt
the Arabic language, which served as the
language of culture, law, and
administration. Over time, many mawla
adopted the social customs of their
patron family and even [music] began to
dress like them. This was incredibly
important during the 8th and 9th
centuries as Islamic society was still
heavily influenced by tribal identity
and inherited status. Lineage was more
than pride. It provided political
authority and social opportunities. By
connecting themselves to a recognized
Arab tribe, Hispano-Romans or Visigothic
peoples could strengthen their position
in the public sphere and gain more
influence in society. For those who
didn't become a mawla, they risked being
socially marginalized even if they had
converted to Islam. They were Muslims in
belief, but they didn't gain access to
the networks that shaped early
al-Andalus. In this way, Arabization and
Islamization developed side by side. As
people converted to Islam, they
generally absorbed much of the related
Arab culture, securing their place
within the wider society. The cultural
and social integration built upon the
mawla system is just one part of a much
larger and more complex story.
Intermarriage between local Iberians and
Arabs also played a powerful role in
reshaping the peninsula and helping root
Islam locally. When the first Islamic
conquerors entered Iberia in the 8th
century, they were mostly male. Many
arrived alone without large families and
as a result over time many decided to
settle down and marry local
Hispano-Roman [music] and Visigothic
women. Under Islamic law, Muslim men
could marry Christian or Jewish women
and the children of those unions were
normally considered Muslim in legal
terms. From the very beginning of the
conquest, a new generation grew up fully
immersed in the Islamic faith. But these
children couldn't be considered foreign
to the region. They were born and raised
in Iberia and had an ancestral
connection to the local peoples of the
land, often through their maternal
lineage. This process of intermarriage
slowly reshaped Iberian society. Within
just a few generations, the Muslim
population of Al-Andalus was no longer
just made up of foreign-born soldiers.
The majority were of local Iberian
ancestry. Yet they were deeply connected
[music] to Arab culture, spoke the
language, and were completely devoted to
Islam. In this way, intermarriage played
as much of a role in the Islamization of
Iberia as taxation, politics, and
patronage. By the 10th century, during
the era of the Umayyad rulers of
Cordoba, the once obvious distinctions
between the Arab elites and the local
Iberians had faded considerably.
>> [music]
>> Prolonged periods of intermarriage,
shared education, and a common political
culture slowly erased the older
divisions. What emerged wasn't just an
Arab society planted in Iberia. It was a
distinct Andalusi identity shaped by
Iberian, Berber, and Arab peoples. By
the 11th century, many scholars believe
Muslims had become the majority across
much of Al-Andalus. By the 12th century,
that majority was firmly established in
many regions. The population remained
somewhat diverse. Yet, the inhabitants
saw themselves as part of a unified
society. But, even with the growing
Muslim population, many refused to
convert.
>> [music]
>> Many Christians continued to practice
their own faith. Over time, they adopted
some aspects of the wider Muslim
culture, including the Arabic language.
These communities became known as
Mozarabs, a term that refers to Arabized
Christians. They continued to go to
church, followed their own religious
beliefs, and preserved aspects of their
older local culture. Yet, [music] in
their daily lives, they followed many
Arab customs. They spoke Arabic, had
Arabic names, and participated in the
wider Islamic cultural world of
Al-Andalus. Even those who didn't
convert were eventually woven into the
fabric of the Arabic-speaking world of
Al-Andalus. Islam's dominance of the
Iberian Peninsula was more than just
religious. It was cultural. But, the
slow and gradual Islamization of the
entire Iberian Peninsula didn't last
forever. In the northern regions, many
Christian communities retained a strong
memory of the 8th century invasion and
took part in a prolonged conflict with
the Muslim rulers that lasted many
centuries. This long struggle became
known as the Reconquista. Over
generations, Christian rulers in places
such as the kingdom of Aragon and the
kingdom of Castile pushed southward and
took control of Muslim territories. As
territories changed hands, the religious
balance of Iberia started to shift once
again. Initially, most Muslims were
allowed to remain under Christian rule
and were even permitted to practice
Islam under certain restrictions. But,
over time, these policies hardened
>> [music]
>> and pressure to convert to Christianity
increased. The turning point came in
1492 following the fall of Granada, the
last Muslim-ruled kingdom in Iberia. Its
surrender to Ferdinand II of Aragon and
Isabella I of Castile marked the end of
Islamic political authority in Iberia, a
presence that had lasted over 700 years.
But, Muslims were not immediately given
a blanket convert or exile order in
1492. If you want the full story about
that, you can watch our video What
happens to the Muslims of Al-Andalus,
where we explain it in detail. Link in
the description. The initial surrender
terms in Granada promised religious
freedom and only later did those
guarantees collapse. In Castile, forced
conversions followed by 1502. And in the
Crown of Aragon, they came later in the
1520s. Those who accepted baptism became
known as Moriscos. Despite their
conversion, Christian leaders remained
suspicious of the Moriscos for many
generations, believing they continued to
practice Islam in secret. This led
Philip III
of Spain to decree the expulsion of the
remaining Moriscos in 1609.
Over the following five years,
approximately 300,000
were expelled, mainly to North Africa,
Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia. Even with
this, the legacy of nearly eight
centuries of Islamic rule couldn't be
erased. Muslims left an indelible mark
on the landscape, from language to
architecture, agriculture, and culture
as a whole. Even today, throughout Spain
and Portugal, traces of that long
chapter can be seen. They stand as a
reminder that one of the most profound
religious transformations in European
history didn't happen through conquest
alone. It happened through centuries of
quiet, steady integration, one family,
one generation, one decision at a time.
You can now explore our maps in even
more detail as prints and downloads.
Premium historical maps designed by
historians. Link below.